Creating events manually

Nathaniel Hill

Nathaniel Hill (1861 in Drogheda, Ireland, – 1934) was an Irish impressionist. During the mid 1880s, he painted in Brittany and at various locations in England.

Joseph Malachy Kavanagh

Joseph Malachy Kavanagh (1856 – April 2, 1918) was an Irish painter. In September 1881 he, along with Walter Osborne and Nathaniel Hill, travelled to Antwerp to take the "Nature" class under Verlat. They returned during the winter of 1882-83 to take Verlat's "Life" class.

Kavanagh travelled to Brittany as well.

Edward McGuire

Edward McGuire (1932-1986) was an Irish painter, still-life artist and bird painter. He travelled in France and Italy from 1951 to 1953.

McGuire plays the flute in the folk group the Whistlebinkies. In January 2006 he travelled to Hong Kong with the group to play a concert ("Scotland the Brave") with the Hong Kong Chamber Orchestra.

Hugh Hamilton

Hugh Hamilton (c. 1740 – 10 February 1808) was an Irish portrait-painter. In 1779 he travelled to Italy, where he remained for the next twelve years.

Creating events from suggested entities

Walter Frederick Osborne

Walter Frederick Osborne (17 June 1859 – 24 April 1903) was an Irish impressionist landscape and portrait painter. Most of his paintings featured women, children, and the elderly as well as rural scenes. He won the Taylor Prize in 1881 and 1882, the highest student honour in Ireland of the time, while studying in Antwerp.

In 1883, Osborne moved to Brittany where he painted his famous Apple Gathering, Quimperlé.

Mary Swanzy

Mary Swanzy (1882 Dublin -1978) is considered to be the first Irish Cubist, preceding Evie Hone and Mainie Jellet. From a young age, Swanzy had travelled widely and this was something she maintained through her life. In 1924 and 1925 she lived in Honolulu and Samoa.

Barrie Cooke

Barrie Cooke (born 1931) is an Irish abstract expressionist painter. He was born in Cheshire, England. He has lived and worked in Ireland since 1954. Though he has been based in Ireland ever since, he is widely traveled and his richly expressionist, semi-abstract paintings have been strongly influenced by time spent in such far-flung places as Lapland, New Zealand, Borneo and Malaya.

Eileen Gray

Eileen Gray (August 9, 1878 – October 31, 1976) was an Irish furniture designer and architect and a pioneer of the Modern Movement in architecture. In 1900 she went on her first visit to Paris.

She also served as Mayor of the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames and has been appointed an Olympic torchbearer for the 2012 London Olympics.

Robert Gibbings

Robert Gibbings (23 March 1889 to 19 January 1958) was an Irish artist and author who was most noted for his work as a wood engraver and sculptor, and for his books on travel and natural history. He was commissioned by Penguin Books to write a travel book. He went to Bermuda and the Red Sea, and wrote and illustrated Blue Angels and Whales (1938). This was the first original writing commissioned by Penguin. The book led to Gibbings’s appointment as art director of a new series of Penguin Illustrated Classics.

In August 1945 he set out for Polynesia again. He visited many of the islands and spent some time in New Zealand.

Sir John Lavery

Sir John Lavery (20 March 1856 – 10 January 1941) was an Irish painter best known for his portraits. Unlike most of his contemporaries, Lavery spent his early years painting in Barbizon rather than Brittany.

Thomas Hickey

Thomas Hickey (1741-1824) was an Irish painter. Hickey painted primarily portraits and genre scenes. He traveled widely, working in India, Portugal, Italy and England.

He eventually reached Bengal and stayed there until 1791.

He then traveled as far as Peking, China with George Macartney, 1st Earl Macartney as the expedition's official portrait painter.

By 1798 he had returned to India where he landed just in time for the start of the Fourth Mysore War, which kept him engaged in painting. He resided in Madras until his death in 1824.

Creating events from suggested relations

Mildred Anne Butler

Mildred Anne Butler (January 11, 1858 – October 11, 1941) was an Irish artist, who worked in watercolour and oil of landscape, genre and animal subjects. In her late twentieths she made annual visits to the continent until the outbreak of war. She travelled to France, Belgium, Switzerland and Italy.

Redmond Herrity

Redmond Herrity is an Irish sculptor from Letterkenny, County Donegal. Herrity was inspired by street sculptors in India during a visit there in 1997. He later visited Australia where he got to work with stone for the first time. To increase his sculpting knowledge he visited Carrara in Italy.

Amelia Curran

Amelia Curran (1775-1847) was an Irish painter. In 1821, she moved to Naples, where she converted to Catholicism. She moved to Paris the next year, where, it was falsely rumored, she had married and separated from a man. She returned to Rome in 1824.

Francis Bacon

Francis Bacon (28 October 1909 – 28 April 1992) was an Irish-born British figurative painter known for his bold, graphic and emotionally raw imagery. He travelled into Paris to visit the city's art galleries.

After 1946, Bacon spent some time in Monte Carlo.

Bacon was impressed by the African landscapes and wildlife, and took photographs in Kruger National Park. On his return journey he spent a few days in Cairo, and wrote to Erica Brausen of his intent to visit Karnak and Luxor, and then travel via Alexandria to Marseilles.

On 27 June 1576, he entered de societate magistrorum at Gray's Inn. He visited Blois, Poitiers, Tours, Italy, and Spain.

Francis Joseph O'Meara

Francis Joseph O'Meara (March 30, 1853 – 1888) was an Irish artist. The son of a doctor, O'Meara was born in Carlow, Ireland. Around 1872, the young artist travelled to Paris where he would study under the French painter Carolus Duran. In 1875 he visited the artists colonies in Barbizon and Grez-sur-Loing.

Aloysius O'Kelly

Aloysius O'Kelly (3 July 1853 in Dublin – c.1941) was an Irish painter. He traveled to Brittany in 1876 painting its aesthetic coastlines, fishing ports and villages.

Roderic O'Conor

Roderic O'Conor (17 October 1860 – 18 March 1940) was an Irish painter. Like his classmate, Richard Moynan, O'Conor would travel to Antwerp and Paris to gain further experience.

In 1892 he went to Pont-Aven in Brittany where he worked closely with a group of artists around the Post-Impressionist Paul Gauguin, whom he befriended.

Norah McGuinness

Norah McGuinness (7 November 1901, County Londonderry, Ireland – 22 November 1980, County Dublin) was an Irish painter and illustrator. She married the editor Geoffrey Phibbs, but they divorced in 1929. The same year she travelled to Paris to work at the studio of André Lhote.

From there she moved to London where she was a member Lucy Wertheim's 'Twenties Group' and of the avant-garde London Group, from 1937-39 she lived in New York.

Michael Mulcahy

Michael Mulcahy (born 1952 in County Cork) is an Irish expressionist painter. He has travelled extensively, particularly in north and west Africa where he has lived and worked in the local community.

Norman Garstin

Norman Garstin (28 August 1847 - 22 June 1926) was an Irish artist, teacher, art critic and journalist associated with the Newlyn School of painters. Garstin attended Victoria College on the island of Jersey and then he worked in architecture and engineering for brief periods. He then travelled to South Africa where he befriended Cecil Rhodes, worked as a journalist and was involved in government in Cape Town.

He then travelled and painted his way through Spain, Morocco and Venice, Italy.

William John Leech

William John Leech (10 April 1881 – 16 July 1968) was an Irish painter. Leech travelled to the South of France, to Marseilles, Grasse and Cagnes-sur-Mer.

Augustus Joseph Nicholas Burke

Augustus Joseph Nicholas Burke (July 28, 1838 – 1891) was an artist and a member of the Royal Hibernian Academy (RHA). He was one of the earliest Irish artists to travel to Brittany.

Diarmuid O'Ceallacháin

Diarmuid O'Ceallacháin (born 31 October 1915 near Drimoleague, County Cork) was an Irish painter known for his landscape and figurative work. He worked in France, Germany, Greece and the Middle East.

Stanhope Alexander Forbes

Stanhope Alexander Forbes R.A., (18 November 1857, – 2 March 1947), was an artist and a founding member of the influential Newlyn school of painters. He was often called 'the father of the Newlyn School'. Forbes and La Thangue went to Cancale, Brittany and painted en plein air.

He travelled to Paris in 1880 and studied under Bonnat at his atelier in Clichy.

Charles Jervas

Charles Jervas (or Charles Jarvis; c. 1675 – 1739) was an Irish portrait painter, translator, and art collector of the early 18th century. In 1699, he travelled to Paris and Rome (while financially supported by Clarke and others).

Robert Charles Goff

Robert Charles Goff (1837-1922) was a printmaker and painter who specialised in topographical scenes. As an etcher he was strongly influenced by the work of James McNeill Whistler. On display were local views of Brighton, Hove and Sussex, as well as pictures from his travels in Britain, Italy, Egypt and Japan.

Others

Paul Kane

Paul Kane (September 3, 1810 – February 20, 1871) was an Irish-born Canadian painter, famous for his paintings of First Nations peoples in the Canadian West and other Native Americans in the Oregon Country.

Not much is known about Kane's youth in York, which at that time was a small settlement of a few thousand people. He went to school at Upper Canada College, and then received some training in painting by an art teacher named Thomas Drury at the Upper Canada College around 1830. In July 1834, he displayed some of his paintings in the first (and only) exhibition of The Society of Artists and Amateurs in Toronto, gaining a favourable review by a local newspaper, The Patriot.

Kane began a career as a sign and furniture painter at York, moving to Cobourg, Ontario, in 1834. At Cobourg, he took up a job in the furniture factory of Freeman Schermerhorn Clench, but also painted several portraits of the local personalities, including the sheriff and his employer's wife. In 1836 Kane moved to Detroit, Michigan, where the American artist James Bowman was living. The two had met earlier at York. Bowman had persuaded Kane that studying art in Europe was a necessity for an aspiring painter, and they had planned to travel to Europe together. But Kane had to postpone the trip, as he was short of money to pay for the passage to Europe and Bowman had married shortly before and was not inclined to leave his family. For the next five years, Kane toured the American Midwest, working as an itinerant portrait painter, travelling to New Orleans.

In June 1841, Kane left America, sailing from New Orleans aboard a ship bound for Marseilles in France, arriving there about three months later. Unable to afford formal art studies at an art school or with an established master, he toured Europe for the next two years, visiting art museums wherever he could and studying and copying the works of old masters. Until autumn 1842 he stayed in Italy, before trekking across the Great St. Bernard Pass, moving to Paris and from there on to London. In London he met George Catlin, an American painter who had painted Native Americans on the prairies and who now was on a promotion tour for his book, Letters and Notes on the Manners, Customs and Conditions of the North American Indians. Catlin lectured at Egyptian Hall at Piccadilly, where he also exhibited some of his paintings. In his book Catlin argued that the culture of the Native Americans was disappearing and should be recorded before passing into oblivion. Kane found the argument compelling and decided to similarly document the Canadian Aboriginal peoples.

Kane returned in early 1843 to Mobile, Alabama, where he set up a studio and worked as a portrait painter until he had paid back the money borrowed for his voyage to Europe. He returned to Toronto late 1844 or early 1845 and immediately began preparing for a trip to the west

Travels in the Northwest

Ojibwa camp at the shores of Georgian Bay; a typical field sketch of Kane's from his first trip 1845

Kane set out on his own on June 17, 1845, travelling along the northern shores of the Great Lakes, visiting first the Saugeen reservation. After weeks of sketching, he reached Sault Ste. Marie between Lake Superior and Lake Huron in summer 1845. He had intended to travel further west, but John Ballenden, an experienced officer of the Hudson's Bay Company stationed at Sault Ste. Marie, told him of the many difficulties and perils of travelling alone through the western territories and advised Kane to attempt such a feat only with the support of the company. After the Hudson's Bay Company had taken over its competitor, the North West Company of Montreal, in 1821, the whole territory west of the Great Lakes until the Pacific Ocean and the Oregon Country was Hudson's Bay land, a largely uncharted wilderness with about a hundred isolated outposts of the company along the major fur trade routes. Kane returned to Toronto for the winter, elaborating his field sketches to oil canvases, and in spring of the next year, he went to the headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company at Lachine (today part of Montreal) and asked company governor George Simpson for support for his travel plans. Simpson was impressed by Kane's artistic ability, but at the same time worried that Kane might not have the stamina needed to travel with the fur brigades of the company. He granted Kane passage on company canoes only as far as Lake Winnipeg, with the promise of full passage if the artist did well until then. At the same time, he commissioned Kane to do paintings of Indian lifestyle for him, with some very detailed instructions as to the subjects.

Going west

Canoe brigade preparing camp on the Winnipeg River while being visited by some Saulteaux. Field sketch by Kane, June 10, 1846.

On May 9, 1846, Kane departed by steamboat from Toronto with the intent to join a canoe brigade from Lachine at Sault Ste. Marie. After an overnight stop, he missed the boat, which had left in the morning earlier than advertised, and he had to race after it by canoe. Arriving at the Sault, he learned that the canoe brigade had already left, so he sailed aboard a freight schooner to Fort William on Thunder Bay. He finally caught up with the canoes about 35 miles (56 km) beyond Fort William on the Kaministiquia River on May 24.

By June 4 Kane reached Fort Frances, where a pass from Simpson for travelling further was awaiting him. His next stop was the Red River Colony (near modern-day Winnipeg). There, he embarked on a three-week excursion by horse, joining a large Métis hunting band that went buffalo hunting in Sioux lands in Dakota Territory in the United States. On June 26 Kane witnessed and participated in one of the last great buffalo hunts, which within a few decades, aided by railroad travel, decimated the animals to near-extinction. Upon his return he continued by canoe and sailing boats by way of Norway House, Grand Rapids, and The Pas up the Saskatchewan River to Fort Carlton. For variety, he continued from there on horseback to Fort Edmonton, witnessing a Cree buffalo pound hunt along the way.

Jasper's House as painted in a field sketch by Kane in 1846.

On October 6, 1846, Kane left Edmonton for Fort Assiniboine, where he again embarked with a canoe brigade up the Athabasca River to Jasper's House, arriving on November 3. Here he joined a large horse troop bound west, but the party soon had to send the horses back to Jasper's House and continue on snowshoes, taking only the essentials with them, because Athabasca Pass was already too deeply snowed in that late in the year. They crossed the pass on November 12 and three days later joined a canoe brigade that had been waiting to take them down the Columbia River.

In the Oregon country

The interior of a ceremonial lodge in the Columbia River region painted by Paul Kane in 1846

Finally, Kane arrived on December 8, 1846, at Fort Vancouver, the main trading post and headquarter of the Hudson's Bay Company in the Oregon Territory. He stayed there over winter, sketching among and studying the Chinookan and other tribes in the vicinity and making several excursions, including a longer one of three weeks through the Willamette Valley. He enjoyed the social life at Fort Vancouver, which at that time was being visited by the British ship Modeste, and became friends with Peter Skene Ogden.

On March 25, 1847, Kane set out by canoe to Fort Victoria, which had been founded shortly before to become the new company headquarter, as the operations at Fort Vancouver were to be wound down and relocated following the conclusion of the Oregon Treaty of 1846, which fixed the continental border between Canada and the United States west of the Rocky Mountains at the 49th parallel north. Kane went up the Cowlitz River and stayed for a week among the tribes living there in the vicinity of Mount Saint Helens before continuing on horseback to Nisqually (today Tacoma) and then by canoe again to Fort Victoria.

Mount St. Helens erupting at night by Kane after his 1847 visit to the area

His painting of Mount St. Helens in eruption at night in 1847 which is housed in the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto was the only known image of an active Cascade volcano until the eruption of Lassen Peak in California in 1914. Although the scene was somewhat fictionalized, it did correctly show the active vent on the side of the volcano rather that the summit. He stayed for two months in that area, traveling and sketching among the Native Americans on Vancouver Island and around the Juan de Fuca Strait and the Strait of Georgia. He returned to Fort Vancouver in mid-June, from where he departed to return back east on July 1, 1847.

Crossing the Rockies again

By mid-July Kane had reached Fort Walla Walla where he made a minor detour to visit the Whitman Mission that a few months later would be the site of the Whitman massacre. He went with Marcus Whitman to visit the Cayuse living in the area and happened to draw a portrait of Tomahas (Kane gives the name as "To-ma-kus"), the man who would later be named as Whitman's murderer. According to Kane's travel report, the relations between the Cayuse and the settlers at the mission were already strained by the time of his visit in July.

Kane crossed the Rocky Mountains twice in winter. (Field sketch by Kane, 1846.)

Kane continued with one guide by horseback through the Grande Coulée to Fort Colville, where he stayed for six weeks, sketching and painting the natives who had set up a fishing camp below Kettle Falls at this time of the salmon run. On September 22, 1847, Kane assumed command of a canoe brigade up the Columbia River and arrived on October 10 at Boat Encampment. The party had to wait for three weeks until a badly delayed horse trek from Jasper arrived. Then they switched, the horse team taking over the canoes and going down the Columbia River, and Kane's group loading their cargo on the horses and taking them back over Athabasca Pass. They managed to bring all 56 horses safely and without loss to Jasper's House, despite the heavy snow and intense cold. As the canoes that should have been awaiting them had already left, they were forced to set out on snowshoes and with a dog sled to Fort Assiniboine, where they arrived after much hardship and without food two weeks later. After a few days' rest, they continued to Fort Edmonton, where they spent the winter.

Kane passed the time at the fort with buffalo hunting, and also sketched among the Cree living in the vicinity. In January he undertook an excursion to Fort Pitt, some 200 miles (320 km) down the Saskatchewan River, and then returned to Edmonton. In April he visited Rocky Mountain House, where he wanted to meet the Blackfoot. When they did not turn up, he returned to Edmonton.

Going back east

The fifth Fort Edmonton was constructed on the high ground above the North Saskatchewan River after the fourth fort, which had been located on the river banks, had been flooded several times.

On May 25, 1848, Kane left Fort Edmonton, travelling with a large party of 23 boats and 130 people bound for York Factory, led by John Edward Harriott. On June 1 they met with a large war party of some 1,500 warriors of Blackfoot and other tribes who were planning a raid against the Cree and Assiniboine. On that occasion Kane met the Blackfoot chief Big Snake (Omoxesisixany). The canoe brigade stayed as briefly as possible and then continued hastily down the river. On June 18 they arrived at Norway House, where Kane stayed for a month, waiting for the annual meeting of the chief factors of the Hudson's Bay Company and the arrival of the party with which he was bound to travel further. On July 24 he departed with the party of one Major McKenzie; they travelled along the eastern shore of Lake Winnipeg to Fort Alexander. From there on Kane followed the same route he had taken two years earlier going west: by the Lake of the Woods, Fort Frances, and Rainy Lake, he travelled by canoe to Fort William and then along the northern shore of Lake Superior until he reached Sault Ste. Marie on October 1, 1848. From there he returned by steamboat to Toronto, where he landed on October 13. He noted in his book on this last leg of his journey: "the greatest hardship that I had to endure now was the difficulty in trying to sleep in a civilized bed".
