Paul Kane began a career as a sign and furniture painter at York where he met James Bowman. Bowman had persuaded Kane to study art in Europe.
Kane returned in early 1843 to Mobile, Alabama.
He had intended to travel further west, but John Ballenden, an experienced officer of the Hudson's Bay Company stationed at Sault Ste. Marie, told him of the many difficulties and perils of travelling alone through the western territories and advised Kane to attempt such a feat only with the support of the company.
Kane made paintings of Indian lifestyle.
Kane departed by steamboat from Toronto. He continued by canoe and sailing boats, witnessing a buffalo pound hunt along the way.
He embarked with a canoe brigade to Jasper's House.
He stayed for two months in that area, traveling and sketching around the Juan de Fuca Strait and the Strait of Georgia.
On July 24 he departed with the party of one Major McKenzie; they travelled along the eastern shore of Lake Winnipeg to Fort Alexander.
Lawrence J. Burpee added in his introduction to the 1925 reprint of Kane's travel book that the sketches were "truer interpretations of the wild western life".
His field sketches were done in pencil, watercolour, or oil on paper.
Kane gained a favourable review by a local newspaper, The Patriot.
Until 1857, Kane fulfilled his commissions: more than 120 oil canvases for Allan, the Parliament, and Simpson. His works were shown at the World's Fair at Paris in 1855. Some of them were sent to Buckingham Palace in 1858 for consideration by the Queen.
The bulk of Kane's oeuvre is the more than 700 sketches.
A collection of 229 sketches was sold by Kane's grandson Paul Kane III for about US$100,000 to the Stark Museum of Art in Orange, Texas, in 1957.
A rare painting of his, Scene in the Northwest: Portrait of John Henry Lefroy garnered a record price at an auction at Sotheby's in Toronto on February 25, 2002, when Canadian billionaire Kenneth Thomson won the bid at C$5,062,500 including the buyer's premium (US$3,172,567.50 at the time). Thomson subsequently donated the painting as part of his Thomson Collection to the Art Gallery of Ontario.
Kane's 1848 exhibition of his sketches cleared the way for artists like William Cresswell or Daniel Fowler.
Kane was one of the first, if not the first, tourist to travel across the Canadian west and the Pacific north-west.
His idealized oil paintings were a factor in the establishment and spreading of the perception of the North American indigenous people as noble savages, contrary to what the artist had intended.
The public at large in Upper and Lower Canada for the first time caught a glimpse of the peoples and their lifestyles in this vast and barely known territory.
Assiniboine hunting buffalo, 1851-56, an oil painting exemplifying the strong influence of European classic art conventions on Kane's studio work.
On 11 August 1971, the year of the centenary of Kane's death, Canada Post issued a postage stamp entitled 'Paul Kane, painter', designed by William Rueter based on Kane's painting "Indian Encampment on Lake Huron". The 7c stamps have 12.5 perforation and were printed by the British American Bank Note Company.

The Surveyor: Portrait of Captain John Henry Lefroy, ca. 1845, sold at a record price of more than 5 million Canadian dollars in 2002. The painting is sometimes also called Scene in the Northwest.

The eleven surviving paintings done for the parliament--one painting was lost in the fire on Parliament Hill in 1916--were transferred in 1955 to the National Gallery of Canada.

In 1853, Kane married Harriet Clench (1823-1892), the daughter of his former employer at Cobourg. David Wilson, a contemporary historian of the University of Toronto, reported that she was also a skilled painter and writer.
The book was titled The Wanderings of an Artist among the Indians of North America from Canada to Vancouver's Island and Oregon through the Hudson's Bay Company's Territory and Back Again and was originally published by Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans & Roberts in London in 1859.